What happens when you type google.com in your browser and press Enter.
These days, in the era of digital technology, we utilize the internet for almost everything. We may study, use social media to stay in touch with friends and family, play online games with players from across the world, listen to music, watch funny cat videos, exchange presentations with coworkers, conduct business meetings via video conferencing services, and more.
Many people have been curious about how we may travel almost anywhere in the globe from the comfort of our homes with just one click ever since the internet became accessible to everyone. For many, the answer to that question has remained a secret for many years. I want to delve a little deeper into what occurs when you enter any URL in this article.
Concepts.
I want to first define what a webpage is before I begin. A webpage is just a text file with specific formatting applied so that it can be read by your browser, such as Chrome, Firefox, Safari, etc. This formatting is known as HyperText Markup Language (HTML). These files are kept on computers that offer the storage service and are available for delivery whenever someone requests them. They are called servers because they provide access to the stuff they contain to those who require it.
Similar to actual courier services, these servers need to have an address so that the person who needs the content can send a "mail" asking delivery. The person who requests the content must also have an address where the server can send the content. These addresses are referred to as IP (Internet Protocol) Addresses and consist of 4 digits between 0 and 255 (one byte) that are separated by periods (ie. 127.0.0.1).
Knowing that the courier service traffic for the delivery might either be Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) or User Datagram Protocol is another crucial topic (UDP). Each one controls how a server's content is supplied, or delivered.
Because TCP ensures that all necessary content is transmitted, it is frequently used to deliver static websites like Wikipedia or Google, email services, and to download files to your computer. This is achieved by transmitting the file in little data packets, each of which includes a delivery confirmation. As a result, if you have ever been downloading something and your internet connection suddenly fails, it will automatically resume once it has recovered. The server would already be aware of how many packets you have and how many you still need to receive, so you wouldn't need to start afresh. The drawback of TCP is that it is frequently slower since it must first verify that you received the previous packet before delivering the next.
Contrarily, UDP is typically utilized to deliver live films or online games. This is due to the fact that UDP is more faster than TCP because it does not care if the information was received or not. Sending the information is the only thing UDP is concerned about. Because of this, if you've ever viewed a live video and either your internet connection or the host's drops, you simply stop seeing the content; when the connection is restored, all that was missed is permanently gone and you can only see the current stream of the broadcast. Online video games fall under this category as well (if you've played any, you know exactly what I mean).
So back to the main question of what happens when you type www.google.com or any other URL (Uniform Resource Locator) in your web browser and press Enter. So the first thing that happens is that your browser looks up in its cache to see if that website was visited before and the IP address is known. If it can't find the IP address for the URL requested then it asks your operating system to locate the web site. The first place your operating system is going to check for the address of the URL you specified is in the hosts file (/etc/hosts in Linux and Mac, c:\windows\system32\drivers\etc\hosts in Windows). If the URL is not found inside this file, then the OS will make a DNS request to find the IP Address of the web page. 
 The first step is to ask the Resolver (or Internet Service Provider) server to look up in its cache to see if it knows the IP Address, if the Resolver does not know then it asks the root server to ask the .COM TLD (Top Level Domain) server - if your URL ends in .net then the TLD server would be .NET and so on - the TLD server will again check in its cache to see if the requested IP Address is there. If not, then it will have at least one of the authoritative name servers associated with that URL, and after going to the Name Server, it will return the IP Address associated with your URL. All this was done in a matter of milliseconds WOW!
After the OS has the IP Address and gives it to the browser, it then makes a GET (a type of HTTP Method) to said IP Address. When the request is made the browser again makes the request to the OS which then, in turn, packs the request in the TCP traffic protocol we discussed earlier, and it is sent to the IP Address. On its way, it is checked by both the OS' and the server's firewall to make sure that there are no security violations. And upon receiving the request the server (usually a load balancer that directs traffic to all available server for that website) sends a response with the IP Address of the chosen server along with the SSL (Secure Sockets Layer) certificate to initiate a secure session (HTTPS). Finally, the chosen server then sends the HTML, CSS, and Javascript files (If any) back to the OS who in turn gives it to the browser to interpret it. And then you get your website as you know it.
Summary
Today when everything is online, it is amazing to know the complexity that takes place in order for us to be able to get to a website. Yet, it is done so fast that very few would even begin to fathom the amazing process that takes place.



